doc: nrf: Added migration guide for the Matter samples (#13619)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases_and_maturity/migration/migration_guide_2.6.rst

    You can also have the DAC private key replaced by zeros in the factory data partition by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_CRYPTO_PSA_MIGRATE_DAC_PRIV_KEY` Kconfig option to ``y``.
    This functionality is experimental.

> * For the Matter samples and applications using :file:`samples/matter/common` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For the Matter samples and applications using the :file:`samples/matter/common` directory:
```

  * The structure of the files located in the :file:`common` directory has been changed.

>     You should align the appropriate paths in your application's :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file and application's source files including header files located in the :file:`common` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Align the appropriate paths in your application's :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file and source files, including header files located in the :file:`common` directory.
```

>   * The :file:`event_types.h` file was removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The :file:`event_types.h` header file was removed.
```

>     If your application uses it, you should add the :file:`event_types.h` file in your application :file:`src` directory, that contains the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If your application uses it, add the :file:`event_types.h` file in your application's :file:`src` directory with the following code in the file:
```

    .. code-block:: C++

>       #pragma once
> 
>       struct AppEvent; /* needs to be implemented in the application code */
>       using EventHandler = void (*)(const AppEvent &);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       #pragma once

       struct AppEvent; /* needs to be implemented in the application code */
       using EventHandler = void (*)(const AppEvent &);
```
Don't think the one-space difference affects the build, but might as well get it just right.

>   * The :file:`board_util.h` was renamed to the :file:`board_config.h` and moved to the :file:`samples/matter/common/src/board` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The :file:`board_util.h` header file was renamed to :file:`board_config.h` and moved to the :file:`samples/matter/common/src/board` directory.
```

>     You should align the source files including it to use the new name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Align any source files that include it to use the new name.
```

  * The new ``Nrf`` and ``Matter`` namespaces have been added to the files located in the :file:`common` directory.

>     You should align the source files using these files to use the appropriate namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Align the source files using these files to use the appropriate namespaces.
```

The following changes are recommended for your application to work optimally after the migration.

* For the Matter samples and applications

  * The new API and helper modules have been added to the :file:`samples/matter/common` directory.

>     All Matter samples and applications have been changed to start using the common software modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All Matter samples and applications have been changed to use the common software modules.

```
Note the empty line to create a paragraph break.

>     You can follow the new approach and migrate your application to use the common software modules, what will signicantly reduce the size of a code required to be implemented in the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can follow the new approach and migrate your application to use the common software modules.
    This will significantly reduce the size of code required to be implemented in the application.
```

>     However you can also stay with the previous approach, but keep in mind that due to the structural differences, it may be harder to use Matter samples and aplications as a reference for your application using older convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can also choose to keep using the previous approach, but due to the structural differences, it may be harder to use Matter samples and applications as a reference for an application using the older approach.
```

>     In the following steps the :ref:`matter_template_sample` will be used as an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In the following steps use the :ref:`matter_template_sample` sample as an example.
```

>     To migrate the application from |NCS| v2.5.0 to start using common software modules from |NCS| v2.6.0, you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To migrate the application from |NCS| v2.5.0 and start using common software modules from |NCS| v2.6.0:
```

    All Matter samples and applications have been changed to use the common software modules.

    You can follow the new approach and migrate your application to use the common software modules.
    This will significantly reduce the size of the code required to be implemented in the application.
    You can also choose to keep using the previous approach, but due to the structural differences, it may be harder to use Matter samples and applications as a reference for an application using the older approach.

    The following steps use the :ref:`matter_template_sample` sample as an example.
    To migrate the application from |NCS| v2.5.0 and start using the common software modules used in |NCS| v2.6.0:

    * Replace the code used for initialization and handling of the board's components, like LEDs or buttons, with the common ``board`` module.
      The ``board`` module handles buttons and LEDs in a way consistent with Matter samples UI.
      It uses the ``task_executor`` common module for posting a board related events.
      You can also use the ``task_executor`` module for posting and dispatching events in your application.

>       To replace the |NCS| v2.5.0 compliant implementation with the ``board`` module, complete the following steps:

Reviewer: That is on  line 91.

>       * Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.h` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      1. Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.h` file:
```
I think this level is not necessary to do in order, but using a numbered list helps readability since there are so many levels bullets otherwise.

You'll need to indent all `code-block`s by one space.

Author: Ok, applied.

        .. code-block:: C++

          #include "app_event.h"
          #include "led_widget.h"

          static void PostEvent(const AppEvent &event);
          void CancelTimer();
          void StartTimer(uint32_t timeoutInMs);

          static void DispatchEvent(const AppEvent &event);
          static void UpdateLedStateEventHandler(const AppEvent &event);
          static void FunctionHandler(const AppEvent &event);
          static void FunctionTimerEventHandler(const AppEvent &event);
          static void ButtonEventHandler(uint32_t buttonState, uint32_t hasChanged);
          static void LEDStateUpdateHandler(LEDWidget &ledWidget);
          static void FunctionTimerTimeoutCallback(k_timer *timer);
          static void UpdateStatusLED();

          FunctionEvent mFunction = FunctionEvent::NoneSelected;
          bool mFunctionTimerActive = false;

>       * Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:
```

              sStatusLED.Set(true);
            } else if (sHaveBLEConnections) {
              sStatusLED.Blink(LedConsts::StatusLed::Unprovisioned::kOn_ms,
                  LedConsts::StatusLed::Unprovisioned::kOff_ms);
            } else {
              sStatusLED.Blink(LedConsts::StatusLed::Provisioned::kOn_ms, LedConsts::StatusLed::Provisioned::kOff_ms);
            }
          }

          void AppTask::CancelTimer()
          {
            k_timer_stop(&sFunctionTimer);
          }

          void AppTask::StartTimer(uint32_t timeoutInMs)
          {
            k_timer_start(&sFunctionTimer, K_MSEC(timeoutInMs), K_NO_WAIT);
          }

          void AppTask::PostEvent(const AppEvent &event)
          {
            if (k_msgq_put(&sAppEventQueue, &event, K_NO_WAIT) != 0) {
              LOG_INF("Failed to post event to app task event queue");
            }
          }

          void AppTask::DispatchEvent(const AppEvent &event)
          {
            if (event.Handler) {
              event.Handler(event);
            } else {
              LOG_INF("Event received with no handler. Dropping event.");
            }
          }

>       * Include the ``board`` and ``task_executor`` modules to the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Include the ``board`` and ``task_executor`` modules to the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.
```

        .. code-block:: C++

          #include "app/task_executor.h"
          #include "board/board.h"

>       * Replace the code in the :c:func:`Init` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Replace the code in the :c:func:`Init` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.
```

>         The :c:func:`Init` method from the ``board`` module has two optional arguments, that you can use to pass own handler implementations for buttons or LEDs handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         The :c:func:`Init` method from the ``board`` module has two optional arguments, that you can use to pass your own handler implementations for handling buttons or LEDs.
```

>         - Remove:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            /* Initialize LEDs */
            LEDWidget::InitGpio();
            LEDWidget::SetStateUpdateCallback(LEDStateUpdateHandler);

            sStatusLED.Init(SYSTEM_STATE_LED);

            UpdateStatusLED();

            /* Initialize buttons */
            int ret = dk_buttons_init(ButtonEventHandler);
            if (ret) {
              LOG_ERR("dk_buttons_init() failed");
              return chip::System::MapErrorZephyr(ret);
            }

            /* Initialize function timer */
            k_timer_init(&sFunctionTimer, &AppTask::FunctionTimerTimeoutCallback, nullptr);
            k_timer_user_data_set(&sFunctionTimer, this);

>         - Add:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            if (!Nrf::GetBoard().Init()) {
                LOG_ERR("User interface initialization failed.");
                return CHIP_ERROR_INCORRECT_STATE;
            }

>       * Replace the code in the :c:func:`StartApp` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Replace the code in the :c:func:`StartApp` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:
```

>         - Remove:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            AppEvent event = {};

            k_msgq_get(&sAppEventQueue, &event, K_FOREVER);
            DispatchEvent(event);

>         - Add in the while loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add in the while loop:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            Nrf::DispatchNextTask();

>       * Replace the code in the :c:func:`ChipEventHandler` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Replace the code in the :c:func:`ChipEventHandler` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:
```

>         - Add at the top of the method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add at the top of the method:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            bool sIsNetworkProvisioned = false;
            bool sIsNetworkEnabled = false;

>         - Remove for the :c:enum:`kCHIPoBLEAdvertisingChange` enum:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove for the :c:enum:`kCHIPoBLEAdvertisingChange` enum:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            sHaveBLEConnections = ConnectivityMgr().NumBLEConnections() != 0;
            UpdateStatusLED();

>         - Add for the :c:enum:`kCHIPoBLEAdvertisingChange` enum:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add for the :c:enum:`kCHIPoBLEAdvertisingChange` enum:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            if (ConnectivityMgr().NumBLEConnections() != 0) {
              Nrf::GetBoard().UpdateDeviceState(Nrf::DeviceState::DeviceConnectedBLE);
            }

>         - Remove for the :c:enum:`kThreadStateChange` and the :c:enum:`kWiFiConnectivityChange` enums:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove for the :c:enum:`kThreadStateChange` and the :c:enum:`kWiFiConnectivityChange` enums:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            UpdateStatusLED();

>         - Add for the :c:enum:`kThreadStateChange` and the :c:enum:`kWiFiConnectivityChange` enums:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add for the :c:enum:`kThreadStateChange` and the :c:enum:`kWiFiConnectivityChange` enums:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            if (sIsNetworkProvisioned && sIsNetworkEnabled) {
              Nrf::GetBoard().UpdateDeviceState(Nrf::DeviceState::DeviceProvisioned);
            } else {
              Nrf::GetBoard().UpdateDeviceState(Nrf::DeviceState::DeviceDisconnected);
            }

>       * Add the ``board`` and ``task_executor`` modules to the compilation.
>         Edit :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Add the ``board`` and ``task_executor`` modules to the compilation.
         Edit the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file as follows:
```
I don't think any competent developer would make the mistake, but do we want to remove the possibility of this being read as removing all previous entries in `target_sources`?

Author: I'm not sure if this could be misread, as we write it's about adding new and not replacing the existing sources. What's your opinion?

Reviewer: It's the "edit" part that I'm worried about. But I guess since we specifically mention removing code in other sections, it shouldn't be a problem.

        .. code-block:: cmake

          target_sources(app PRIVATE
              ${COMMON_ROOT}/src/app/task_executor.cpp
              ${COMMON_ROOT}/src/board/board.cpp
          )

>       * Add the common :file:`Kconfig` file to the list of sourced Kconfig files.
>         To do that, edit your application :file:`Kconfig` file and add the following code one line before sourcing the :file:`Kconfig.zephyr` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Add the common :file:`Kconfig` file to the list of sourced Kconfig files.
         To do so, edit your application :file:`Kconfig` file and add the following code one line before sourcing the :file:`Kconfig.zephyr` file:
```

        .. code-block:: kconfig

          source "${ZEPHYR_BASE}/../nrf/samples/matter/common/src/Kconfig"

    * Replace the code used for Matter stack initialization with the common ``matter_init`` module.

>       The ``matter_init`` module initializes the Matter stack in a safe way, which means it takes care about the proper order of a software modules initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The ``matter_init`` module initializes the Matter stack in a safe way, which means it takes care of the proper order of initialization for software modules.
```

      It uses the ``matter_event_handler`` common module for defining a default Matter event handler.

>       You can customize the module behavior by injecting own initialization parameters and callbacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      You can customize the module behavior by injecting your own initialization parameters and callbacks.
```

      To replace the |NCS| v2.5.0 compliant implementation with the ``matter_init`` module, complete the following steps:

>       * Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.h` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      1. Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.h` file:
```

        .. code-block:: C++

          #if CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA
          #include <platform/nrfconnect/FactoryDataProvider.h>
          #else
          #include <platform/nrfconnect/DeviceInstanceInfoProviderImpl.h>
          #endif

>       * Replace the code in the :c:struct:`AppTask` class, in the :file:`app_task.h` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Replace the code in the :c:struct:`AppTask` class, in the :file:`app_task.h` file:
```

>         - Remove

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            static void ChipEventHandler(const chip::DeviceLayer::ChipDeviceEvent *event, intptr_t arg);

            #if CONFIG_CHIP_FACTORY_DATA
              chip::DeviceLayer::FactoryDataProvider<chip::DeviceLayer::InternalFlashFactoryData> mFactoryDataProvider;
            #endif

>         - Add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            static void MatterEventHandler(const chip::DeviceLayer::ChipDeviceEvent *event, intptr_t arg);

>       * Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Remove the following code from the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:
```

        .. code-block:: C++

          #include "fabric_table_delegate.h"
          #include <platform/CHIPDeviceLayer.h>
          #include <app/server/Server.h>
          #include <credentials/DeviceAttestationCredsProvider.h>
          #include <credentials/examples/DeviceAttestationCredsExample.h>
          #include <lib/support/CHIPMem.h>
          #include <lib/support/CodeUtils.h>
          #include <system/SystemError.h>

          #ifdef CONFIG_CHIP_WIFI
          #include <app/clusters/network-commissioning/network-commissioning.h>
          #include <platform/nrfconnect/wifi/NrfWiFiDriver.h>
          #endif

          #include <zephyr/kernel.h>

          using namespace ::chip::Credentials;

          #ifdef CONFIG_CHIP_WIFI
          app::Clusters::NetworkCommissioning::Instance
            sWiFiCommissioningInstance(0, &(NetworkCommissioning::NrfWiFiDriver::Instance()));
          #endif

>       * Include the ``matter_init`` module to the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Include the ``matter_init`` module to the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.
```

        .. code-block:: C++

          #include "app/matter_init.h"

>       * Rename the :c:func:`ChipEventHandler` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file, to the :c:func:`MatterEventHandler` method.
>       * Replace the code in the :c:func:`Init` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Rename the :c:func:`ChipEventHandler` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file, to the :c:func:`MatterEventHandler` method.
      #. Replace the code in the :c:func:`Init` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:
```

>         - Remove

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove:
```

              SetDeviceAttestationCredentialsProvider(Examples::GetExampleDACProvider());
            #endif

              static chip::CommonCaseDeviceServerInitParams initParams;
              (void)initParams.InitializeStaticResourcesBeforeServerInit();

              ReturnErrorOnFailure(chip::Server::GetInstance().Init(initParams));
              ConfigurationMgr().LogDeviceConfig();
              PrintOnboardingCodes(chip::RendezvousInformationFlags(chip::RendezvousInformationFlag::kBLE));
              AppFabricTableDelegate::Init();

              /*
              * Add CHIP event handler and start CHIP thread.
              * Note that all the initialization code should happen prior to this point to avoid data races
              * between the main and the CHIP threads.
              */
              PlatformMgr().AddEventHandler(ChipEventHandler, 0);

              err = PlatformMgr().StartEventLoopTask();
              if (err != CHIP_NO_ERROR) {
                LOG_ERR("PlatformMgr().StartEventLoopTask() failed");
                return err;
              }

              return CHIP_NO_ERROR;

>         - Add the code before the board components initialization.
>           The :c:func:`PrepareServer` method has two optional arguments, that you can use to pass an own Matter event handler and an own initialization data including custom callbacks invoke before and after the initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add the following code before the board components initialization.
           The :c:func:`PrepareServer` method has two optional arguments that you can use to pass your own Matter event handler and  initialization data, including custom callbacks to invoke before and after the initialization.
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            /* Initialize Matter stack */
	          ReturnErrorOnFailure(Nrf::Matter::PrepareServer(MatterEventHandler));

>         - Add the code at the end of :c:func:`Init` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add the following code at the end of :c:func:`Init` method:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            return Nrf::Matter::StartServer();

>       * Add the ``main_init`` and ``matter_event_handler`` modules to the compilation.
>         Edit :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Add the ``main_init`` and ``matter_event_handler`` modules to the compilation.
         Edit the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file as follows:
```

        .. code-block:: cmake

          target_sources(app PRIVATE
              ${COMMON_ROOT}/src/app/matter_init.cpp
              ${COMMON_ROOT}/src/app/matter_event_handler.cpp
          )

>     * Replace the code used for Matter events handling with the common ``matter_event_handler`` module.
>       The ``matter_event_handler`` module handles an events generated by the Matter stack in a Nordic platform specific way.
>       However, you can customize the module behavior by registering an own Matter event handler that extends the default implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Replace the code used for Matter event handling with the common ``matter_event_handler`` module.
      The ``matter_event_handler`` module handles events generated by the Matter stack in a Nordic platform-specific way.
      You can customize the module behavior by registering your own Matter event handler that extends the default implementation.
```

      To replace the |NCS| v2.5.0 compliant implementation with the ``matter_event_handler`` module, complete the following steps:

>       * Remove the :c:func:`MatterEventHandler` method declaration from the :file:`app_task.h` file.
>       * Remove the :c:func:`MatterEventHandler` method implementation from the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.
>       * Replace the code in the :c:func:`Init` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      1. Remove the :c:func:`MatterEventHandler` method declaration from the :file:`app_task.h` file.
      #. Remove the :c:func:`MatterEventHandler` method implementation from the :file:`app_task.cpp` file.
      #. Replace the code in the :c:func:`Init` method, in the :file:`app_task.cpp` file:
```

>         - Remove

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Remove:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            ReturnErrorOnFailure(Nrf::Matter::PrepareServer(MatterEventHandler));

>         - Add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         * Add:
```

          .. code-block:: C++

            ReturnErrorOnFailure(Nrf::Matter::PrepareServer());

            /* Register Matter event handler that controls the connectivity status LED based on the captured Matter network
             * state. */
             ReturnErrorOnFailure(Nrf::Matter::RegisterEventHandler(Nrf::Board::DefaultMatterEventHandler, 0));

>       * Add the ``matter_event_handler`` module to the compilation.
>         Edit :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      #. Add the ``matter_event_handler`` module to the compilation.
         Edit :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file as follows:
```

         .. code-block:: cmake

          target_sources(app PRIVATE
              ${COMMON_ROOT}/src/app/matter_event_handler.cpp
          )

> 

Reviewer 2: What about Replacing specific events for all samples? I mean, now there is a different way to manage application events. Some specific samples use it in a new way and customers may have used that specific sample as a template. For example, in the doorlock sample, the Identify handler uses Nrf::PostTask and Nrf::GetBoard to handle identifying, so when users migrate to the new API version they should replace it in this way within their application. And again the question is, do we want to describe here only the template sample? If so, then all things can stay as they are, otherwise I guess that we need to describe here the new PostTask method.

Author: Well, I think we can discuss it in the team. I assumed we don't want to create that detailed guide to mention all possible places in all samples that were changed. I selected template as an example, because it's the simplest one and it contains only generic code shared by all other samples. 
Regarding the fact that the new module can be used to post application events, it is mentioned in the line 95:

>       The ``board`` module handles buttons and LEDs in a way consistent with Matter samples UI.
>       It uses the ``task_executor`` common module for posting a board related events.
>       You can also use the ``task_executor`` module for posting and dispatching events in your application.
